# ecoherb
Two major ecological shifts shaped 60 million years of ungulate faunal evolution

The fossil record provides direct evidence for the behavior of biological systems over millions of years. In doing so, paleontological information becomes a key source to study the evolution of ecosystems and how they responded to major environmental shifts. Using network analysis over a dataset of over 3,000 fossil species spanning the past 60 Myr, we found that ungulate continental assemblages experienced long periods of ecological stability interrupted by irreversible reorganizations linked with abiotic events (tipping points). In early Cenozoic times, communities were characterized by mid-size browsers with low-crowned teeth and showed increasing functional diversity. The formation of a land connection between Eurasia and Africa, around 21 Ma, triggered a first major transition towards a new functional system characterized by the prevalence of big-size browsers with mid to high crowned teeth. Again, the new functional fauna experienced increasing functional diversity, which peaked around 10 Ma. Shortly thereafter, stemming from increased aridity and the spread of C4-dominated vegetation, a second major tipping point marked the inception of new functional faunas. The new functional state is characterized by a combination of grazers and browsers with high and low crowned teeth. The global loss of functional diversity, which started 10 Ma, underwent an acceleration since 2.5 Ma. Despite such decline, the functional structure of terrestrial ungulate faunas has remained unaltered for the last part of the Cenozoic. The evolutionary history of large mammal assemblages is marked by two major functional transitions at critical points coincident with large-scale tectonic and climatic processes.
